Still waiting for
The table when you're ready. Uh, yeah, yeah.
Um, You want some response first? No, no, no, no.
We're just waiting on natural hazards. Oh, okay. Okay. Okay.
We'll get them. We did say 18, so we'll give them, yeah. Hi.
Thanks, Tara.
Go. We appreciate your response in the, in the circumstance.
Okay. We're welcome. The chief executive, the chair.
Thank you for being here ahead of time.
And, uh, we've got 15 minutes
allocated to that if we need that.
So we're welcoming the introductory remarks. Thank you.
Well, Morena, I'm Bevin Killick, um,
the Chair of Southern Response.
So Southern Response is a crown company
with a limited purpose that is
to settle the Canterbury earthquake claims
from the failed policy holder, owned mutual insurer, a MI,
the Canterbury Earthquake claim claims are considered
by globe, the global insurance industry to be some of the
most complex ever.
This is due to most of the policies being total replacement,
cover apportionment between earthquake events,
apportionment between what was BQC now,
natural Hazards Commission
and insurers changing building regulations.
And in some cases, commissioners put into building
regulation departments of councils,
Various local bodies being involved, uninsured properties,
underinsured properties, multi-unit builds
with different insurers under insurance, no insurance.
And I could go on.
So the previous chair, Alistair James, retired at the end
of June, 2025.
He was not replaced. And as we run down,
we are now a board of three.
I've been appointed chair our Dean, Boto Corkin, now chair,
the Audit and Risk Committee, and Fiona PIM is the third
director in the last year.
We have largely concluded the preoc October, 2020,
uh, sorry, 2014 payment package.
This resulted from a class action from customers
who had settled prior to October, 2014, as opposed
to those who had opted for a managed repair or rebuild,
and who the higher courts determined were entitled
to additional payments.
Upon conclusion of the project,
the associated staff were made redundant.
This project was significantly more successful than we had
expected, as it was difficult to track down people
and convinced them that they were
entitled to additional funds.
In terms of business as usual,
we have now settled over 50,000 claims
and over 900, 9,300 over cap claims.
We have been directed to work closely
with the Natural Hazards Commission
to resolve the remaining claims.
The insurance industry knows claims
do not get better with time.
We have some strategies to bring claims to the fore earlier.
Um, I have our chief executive, Casey Huran with me today,
and we are happy to take any questions. Okay,
Thank you. I'm gonna go to, um,
Dr. Deborah Russell.
Thank you. Nice to see you, Casey.
Um, um, the first set of things, I mean, um,
making people redundant, how many staff were made redundant?
13. 13. And what were you able to do
to help 'em find new employment?
Uh, so we had, uh, we had, um, these sessions run with,
um, people that specialized in
creating CVS and things like that.
Um, we also were pretty open about the fact
that redundancies were happening,
so if there's anything we could do to facilitate 'em into,
um, new roles, we would.
And I'm pleased to say that every one of those, um,
people have found a new job. So Great.
So there's a really good process there. Yeah,
It was, and we had no sort of pushback on it.
Everybody knew it was a limited life sort of project. Yeah.
So it was, um, it was one of those things
where everybody knew what they'd signed up for
and yeah, we did what we could
to facilitate 'em into those new roles.
And of course, Christchurch is the, um, booming
and happening place to be at the moment. So
It's great. It's a good place
to be at the moment, so, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. So that sounds really good.
Um, look, this is an impossible question to answer,
so I'm gonna ask it anyway. How long,
How long? Um,
it's,
and that's one of the things that I think
that we've been working on at the moment, is what can we do
to expedite the claims?
Um, one of the interesting things
that we've discovered at the moment is that the average age
of our policy holders now is, um, about 65.
And so what we're also seeing is that two thirds
of our policy holders are the original homeowners.
So what you'd expect in the next sort of 10 to 20 years is
that that group would look to sell their house
and then may discover that there are some issues
with the original repairs.
So it still could go on for quite a long time as people
move on and buy and sell houses in Canterbury.
'cause that's, as I've said to you previously, is that
that's often the catalyst for discovering
that there's a problem is the
buying and selling of property.
Um, so what we are trying to do at the moment is,
is there a way that we can be more sensible about trying
to track down those people
and potentially go to their properties
and say, we just need to check to see
that it was done properly the first time.
And that's the thing we're doing at the moment,
but it's a, we don't want to, um, spook people
or scare people unnecessarily.
So we are looking at, um, smarter ways of doing it, like
around land conditions.
So if it was all land at the time
or if there was, um, certain characteristics
of the property, so was it a heavier property, um,
with heavier cladding, that might
mean there was more damage as well.
And so we are doing a lot of
that desktop work at the moment to try and assess that.
And for us to be able to do that,
NH C's being very cooperative in terms of supplying data.
So it's, um, we want to do it, as I say, in a sensible way,
not a way where we are haphazard in
unnecessarily alarming people.
So in answer to your question, if we sat on our hands
and did nothing, it would be another 20
or 30 years we could potentially be getting claims, um, just
as that, that demographic ages
and moves on into, um, downsizing
or into, um, retirement homes.
Um, if we can do the work that we're doing at the moment,
well then we're hoping we can bring that forward. Yeah.
So it's, it's a long process. Yes.
Um, trying to recall, when I was minister,
I think you told me that after the LA earthquake
or in 20 No, 19 something or
Other, nine five.
Nine five is Yes. Something in the nineties. Yeah. It
Took about 25 years.
Yes. Yep. And is it, yeah,
and this is even more complicated than that
because you've got multiple earthquakes you've had, um,
and having the two layers of insurance,
so NHC initially Yeah.
And then us coming in. So for these claims
that I'm talking about, it's, these aren't, um,
claims that we've been dealing with.
These are new ones yet that even come in the door.
So these are the ones that we yet to, um, deal with.
And that's why for us, there isn't the opportunity for us
to just say, sorry, we're, we're packing up
and closing down now.
Because for some of these people,
they're gonna discover this problem as they're dealing
with their largest asset thinking that, you know,
they've worked hard all their lives
and then all of a
sudden discover that there might be a problem.
So that's, that's, that's a difficulty more than this.
Okay. Okay. Thanks.
And if, if, if I may, the, um,
the LA earthquake claims would've been
probably an indemnity policy rather than
a total replacement replacement.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. So yeah.
And total replacement up to the current code, there's a lot
of additional complexity and in, in these ones, so Yeah.
Yeah. Dr. David Wilson.
Um, first of all, thank you for your work.
Um, in some cases it's a very thankless task
and, um, the government has stepped in perhaps in places
where private sector may have had a better response.
Um, so I'm actually interested in your views on
how insurers are reacting.
Now. I'm hearing from constituents
that perhaps there's a little bit
of over egging the risks associated with climate change
and with these natural hazards,
and it's generally moving out beyond those areas
that you might say are, are high risk.
Yeah. Um,
I, I hear what you're saying in, in some,
in some ways it's sort of slightly out of scope for Yeah.
Um, sounds like a very insurancey term to, um, you know,
it's, you know, we are looking back in terms
of the policies that were in place.
So, um, if I can caveat sort of Yeah.
My, my answer by saying Yeah, that's not our concern. Yeah.
Um, with due respect. Yeah.
Um, but, um, you know, I, I think
New Zealand has always had great penetration of insurance,
and we've been very lucky for that.
And, and that's evident in the way Christchurch looks now.
Um, that's something that's unusual globally
and, um, I, I think, you know,
these insurance companies are corporate entities, um, that,
um, are there to make a dollar for their shareholders.
Um, and, you know,
we wouldn't in New Zealand enjoy the insurance penetration
that we have if it wasn't for
schemes like the Natural Hazards Commission.
Mm-hmm. And, um, if, if you go to Lloyd's of London
where I used to work, um, that is a scheme
that is admired internationally.
Um, you know, nothing's gonna be perfect,
but if it wasn't for that, we wouldn't have the,
the penetration of insurance that we do in New Zealand.
So, um, these commercial entities will be looking at, um,
where, um, they are overexposed
and, um, sometimes it, it, I I don't think
that the insurance industry is doing a great job at
explaining why they are hesitant at some areas.
Yeah. I mean, would end, it was recently in the, in media
and I, I, I feel that is an unusual, um,
place to, um, Westport.
I get, I mean, there's some real flood risk there.
Um, you know, maybe some places need to be moved.
Um, what ends unusual, I think it's actually the,
the capacity of those insurers to,
for a geographic lo location,
they're overexposed to that location.
Um, it's actually probably no different to Ash Burton
or Nui or anywhere else.
Um, so there's some sort of things in the background
that I don't think they're explaining very well.
Um, they are going to price for risk. Yeah. Um,
Already are, Well, well, they're, they're, and,
and that's because, um,
but you know, we, we need a, a, a, a really broad approach
as a, as a country to this, which includes
where councils are consenting, properties are being built.
Um, so it, it, it is a quite a wicked problem.
Um, and, and they will price for that.
But, um, I think, you know, we need to look more broadly as
to how we tackle it.
Yeah. Given your experience looking to the future,
there's, there's a real role here.
True. Yeah. Okay. Anyone else? Yeah, yeah.
Just, um, just a quick question, uh, more in a gent.
Um, I, I, I was just reading through the board charter
and I didn't see any kind of treaty clause
or, um, any obligation to that.
So just part of my question is, is how,
how have you been working with some
of the Maori communities down there and,
and across the country in some of those particular areas?
Uh, and I would suspect that many in the no insurance space,
um, and especially when you head up to,
you start heading into, um,
and places like that where the, um, uh, we, we saw that
with the, the floods.
Um, but just wanting to know in terms of the, the work
that you do, um, how, how closely do you work with kind
of the Maori entities iwi in regards to, um, the may you do
with, uh, Southern Response? Sure.
So I think, um, first, you know,
these are all Canterbury Earthquake claims, um, from the,
the 2010 11 earthquake sequence.
Um, so we, um, uh, nhu, uh,
a big in our, um, um,
in, in our mindset, uh, Fiona Pim is Nhu, uh, who's
so a, a third of our border, um,
from the local iwi, if you like.
Um, we've, we've worked closely, um, particularly
with the, uh, you know, when we've opened buildings
and had them blessed and, um, as a board, um, done our own,
um, cultural awareness and tore training.
Um, and, um, we've found,
I, I don't think the local Maori population have been, um,
and we have looked at this quite deeply, um, have been,
um, materially differently treated or,
or, uh, in different situations to, to the, the,
um, to everyone else.
Um, we, we have been sensitive to that.
Um, uh,
but no, we've, we've had great engagement with, in fact,
we were over the road from them, in fact,
next door at one stage, um,
and in show place where the, um, the nu is, um, down
and in, um, tower Junction.
So, um, yeah, I, I, is there much more you'd add to that? I,
I think one of the challenges is that
where you mentioned no insurance,
and one of the things that for us to actually, um,
settle the claim in the first place, they have
to have an insurance policy in place.
And so one of the, the things that I guess we had an engaged
with Maori in that way was that a number of people
that don't have insurance simply wouldn't get to us.
And so, um, I guess any opportunities to deal
with people in more fraught circumstances,
like those ones without insurance
just never came in our way.
And that's, that's, that's the, the, I guess the,
the simple answer and all of that is that, um,
expectancy we're conscious of, um, how you engage with Maori
and, um, and what we should be doing in those circumstances.
But the, the demographic of people that were our claimants,
um, proportionately,
they just weren't a large number of Maori that were there.
Thank you. Thank you. Any, any further questions? No.
Okay. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you. Appreciate,
Appreciate All work you've done on your written
questions and answers too much.
Well done. Thank you. Just, okay.
We've got the Natural Hazards Commission outside.
They're not going, they're wanting
to spend more time on the road in the election,
so, mm.
Good morning. Yeah.
Firstly, apologies. We, uh, didn't realize we were tied
by the list that were shut off today.
So not, not the first time Yeah.
Happened to all of us. Oh, right.
Okay. Well, we don't feel quite so bad there. Thank you.
Yeah, no, that's all right. No welcome.
Um, uh, we look forward to some introductory remarks
and some introduction of your, uh, uh, team.
And then we'll, um, do a bit of a q and a.
We've got 45 minutes allocated, see how we get. Thank you.
Okay. Thanks Chair.
Uh, just introduce, uh, um, I've gotta start with Tina,
Tina Mitchell, who's our chief executive.
Oh, good. Uh, we've got Chris in the back here as our CFO,
Chris Cheney and Mikala Ham was our, uh, head of strategy.
And thanks for the opportunity to, uh, share with you some
of the progress we've made, some of the achievements, some
of the challenges, and some of the opportunities.
Um, firstly just acknowledge the recent weather events
that's been very tough, uh, on those affected, obviously.
Um, happy to talk more about that if you'd like us to.
I think one of the, I've been, uh, in this role as chair for
three, just three plus years now.
And one of the things that I was very impressed
with coming into the role was the very clear strategic
framework that Natural Hazard Commission Akata has.
Um, and it's around, uh, upstream, downstream,
so there's resilience, uh, there's readiness,
there's recovery, and there's risk financing
supporting all of that.
We haven't changed that for five years, actually.
It's a very sound, uh, logical
and workable framework in terms of, uh, the overall message,
um, for the committee.
Look, I think we've had a really good year.
Um, good progress. We've hit 37 out of 39 of our,
uh, SOPE measures.
Um, so good performance. A couple of there we've missed.
One is around the short dated, uh, settlement of claims, uh,
just 3% short of
what we expected there, and it's been tough.
The other one is, uh, it's been tough on the, uh,
satisfaction, um, for about 57 homeowners, uh,
the residual 57 homeowners that we have with, uh,
the natural, uh, the, uh, north Island weather events.
Uh, and that's primarily to do with complexity
around land cover, and happy to talk more about that.
But overall, very, uh, pleasing.
Uh, in terms of, uh, the financial side, uh,
you know, we, we posted a, um, good surplus this year, um,
close to 300 million.
That's very helpful when you've got negative
equity of 700 million.
So it takes us back closer to zero, uh, but not quite.
Um, and of course that's reflective, um, of a benign,
uh, claims here last year, about 2000 claims.
So that's very low, uh, for us,
and we are ready for the sort of big event
that comes next on the cost side.
Look, we are very disciplined about our cost.
We always have been. Uh, we continue to be, uh,
we came in under budget, uh, 3% less year on year,
I'm sure on the restatement.
Um, I'm sure the auditors have taken you through
that on behalf of the audit general,
but happy to, um, uh, take any questions on that.
Um, there's no economic impact on that, but,
but it is a restatement and just acknowledge that.
Finally, organizational health, um, how's, uh, you know,
the Natural Hazard Commission, uh,
traveling in terms of the organization?
Uh, well, we think, uh, we've got a very good, um, team.
We've got good engagement,
and this last year our public, uh, reputation in X was 62,
which is the highest it's ever been.
So that was very pleased. Thank you. Okay, thank you.
We're gonna go to Deborah Russell, Dr. Deborah Russell.
Lovely to see you. Very nice to see you. Yeah.
Um, so much to talk about.
So, um, let's, uh, I just wanna start with the, um, levy,
um, at I, through last year, there was,
um, a discussion as to whether
or not the, um,
natural Hazards Commission levy would be increased or not.
And I know that was a very live discussion,
but just in the last few weeks we've heard
that it's not going to be increased for the time being.
Yes. What impact is that going to have on
how you structure your
Yeah, so our levy, as you know,
has been 16 cents per a hundred dollars.
Um, in terms of actuarial modeling
around breakeven, it's not sufficient.
Um, so it does need to go up.
In some states there's a question about timing on that.
Um, and of course, everyone pays the same levy.
So when that's a decision for the government,
um, of the day.
Um, and at the moment, I think the priority seems
to be on the review of the private sector, uh, insurance.
Uh, and there's a review going on with that at the moment.
So I imagine it will come, uh, back onto the table
after that, but it definitely does need to go up.
So it needs to go up in terms
of the cents per dollar of cover. Yep.
Yes, it does. That's right. Yep.
Um, yeah, so on, on a, uh, actuarial basis, um,
you know, we can handle the, you know, attritional losses
as we call them, you know, the current weather events.
So if you look at the recent weather events for us,
you know, that'll be less than a thousand funds.
If you look at the North Island weather events,
that's 11,000 claims.
And if you look at Canterbury,
that's 170,000 property claims.
And so we need to be set up for the big event.
Um, we can handle these attritional losses out of, uh,
cash flow, but ultimately there's a crown guarantee if a big
event happens, and we haven't
put enough money to pay for that.
So, and that, that was my understanding.
So in terms of a big event, I get
that just the ongoing claims that happen.
Yes. And so I, I was looking at those events
as they were occurring.
Yes. And going, actually, this is terrible, obviously
for the people who are affected and
especially with the loss of life.
Yes. But it wasn't gonna have a big
impact on what you are doing.
Yes. What level of event is going to, as it were,
trigger the need to invoke the Crown guarantee,
because the reserves on that?
Yeah. Um, so if you look at Canterbury, for example,
we funded that by, uh, about $6 million out of reserves,
you know, the natural hazard fund
and about $5 million of reinsurance
and a couple hundred million from the Crown.
So it was largely self-funded.
Um, if we look at a modeled event
for Wellington 7.8 earthquake
or hick, um, say $15 billion, uh, the way
that would be funded is we've got
$10 billion of reinsurance.
Wow. Um, and we've got, uh, an excess of, um,
starting 2.5 billion.
Um, so, so that goes up to sort of 12 and a half.
So the Crown would be on the hook for above that.
And they're also on the hook for the balance from two
and a half billion back down to our current balance
of the NDF, which is currently about
600 million as well. Right.
So one of just maybe sort of think now in terms of
that levy not being increased at present Yes.
Is that gonna have an impact on the way that, um,
raki can actually get its reinsurance book filled?
No. No, we don't think so. No. Right.
Um, you know, we do have levy income of $900 million a year.
It's, you know, not insignificant.
Um, so there is a choice about how much reinsurance we take.
Um, we could take no reinsurance.
Um, you know, that's always a choice,
but that would, um, expose the crown unnecessarily.
So it is trying to find an optimal sort of sweet spot there
and, and make sure we get value for money
with the reinsurance purchase. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Um, Tina, how's it been going, getting
that reinsurance book filled that, oh,
Um, well, Tina, uh, been nice to see you, Deborah.
Uh, the, yeah, really, well, actually, last year we,
it was a record amount for us to, um,
secure $10.3 billion worth of reinsurance,
and we were able to do that.
So we went up by a billion,
but for the same price that we paid the year before.
So actually very good. Oh, last year.
Um, and, uh, I think, um, I know, uh, some
of the other committee members have met with some
of the reinsurers in, in London
and New Zealand has, you know, we are 80 years old now
as a scheme, and so we have this longstanding relationship
with the capital markets and we, it's incredibly important
that we protect that when we are the second riskiest country
in the world, and when we've got the financial pressures
that the country is experiencing at the moment.
So we do invest a lot in those relationships,
but we also get a lot of positive feedback, um, about that.
And I imagine today we're going to go on to talk about, um,
you know, the rising risks of, of climate change and things.
And I just, if I can start with an optimistic note, the, um,
the global commentators say, look, if anyone can do it,
New Zealand can actually,
because you've got some really good foundations in place,
a fantastic public private scheme, really smart people.
No one has all the answers,
but you're only 5 million people.
So if you guys can join yourselves up together
and get going, anyone can, you know?
Right. That's, yeah. So I just thought I'd start with that
positive message because it can feel, you know, difficult
and challenging day to day. Yeah.
I'm just getting incredibly
technical now just because I'm interested.
Um, um, cat bonds, are you still, do you still got some
Cat bonds? Well,
we've got one year left on our, um, on our
existing catastrophe bond.
And the market changes very much from year to year. Yeah.
Uh, so at the moment
the cap bond market is taking off the traditional market is,
there's plenty of capacity to deploy.
And so every year we just look at it for how are we going
to get the best value for money out of our, our spend
because we are buying a big chunk, 10 billion,
and we are buying at a very high layer, uh, where we can,
you know, get some good, um,
return on our investment there. Cool.
Alright. I've got more questions, Cameron. Okay. No,
That's all right. We'll go to the, on
Barbaras. Yeah.
Um, good morning, and thank you.
Yeah, I mean, a lot
of the questions I was thinking about is particularly
around the reinsurance, uh, you've, you've addressed
and yeah, confirming that, that's basically the comments
that I'd had from the three reinsurers
that I made quite resale in the last year or so.
Um, one of the other elements that they said
that strengthens their confidence in New Zealand
is the science that we have in relation to this.
Do you, um, my apologies
and my apologies to the previous minister, um,
do you basically support part of that as part of GNS as part
of that geotechnical work?
Mean? What is your involvement in that?
Because obviously that supports your ability to model
as well as, you know, know the long-term
sustainability of the fund.
Well, that's what I look like from a public perspective.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. It's a massive part of our role.
That's, that's right. And it's actually,
so we also keep in touch with other schemes like ours,
catastrophe schemes around the world.
And it is the thing that distinguishes us from the 20 other
schemes like us around the world.
We specifically, we call it our resilience portfolio.
So we, uh, we invest around 15 million a year in science
and research and funding geo net.
But, and we've been doing that for decades,
it's really important
to not just be the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff.
It's really important to be the fence at the top.
So you can only be an effective fence at the top if you
understand what the risk is continuing
to invest in that science.
We have amazing scientists in New Zealand, so flowing
that data, modeling
and science, our role as NHC, as we take all of that,
turn it into actionable insights
that we then share across the whole system.
So to policy makers like MFE
and MB who are setting the building codes
to the professions when it comes to guidelines
or professional codes or standards
or building materials, those sorts of things.
Councils, we make a lot of submissions on land use planning,
don't let people build in the wrong places.
Um, even developers now actually coming to us for advice.
We also, um, will share it with homeowners,
really importantly.
So, um, every person in the system needs to understand
what is happening with the risk and how it impacts them
and what they can do to reduce the risk.
And there's actually quite a lot everyone can do.
So for homeowners, that's about where do I live, uh,
or where am I about to buy using our natural
hazards portal that we have.
Um, what can I do to strengthen my property, go down
to the hardware shop, you know, maintain my retaining walls.
And last year we were really pleased with the impact.
When I think about the impact that that work has,
we survey people last year, 61%
of people said they not only read our materials, they engage
with them, and then they took action to actually go down
to the runnings or might attend and to, and do some work.
So for us, that's actually the things we get really excited
about, is convincing people to take action.
Plus all of the other things we measure, like the number
of councils that change their land use planning decisions
as a result of our advice, the number of policy agencies
that rely on our advice.
So we do measure that impact because it is important.
Um, and that's the way, as a society, we're going
to grasp this problem.
It's a, you know, this is the problem
of our generation, isn't it?
And do you find that most councils, I mean,
having spoken to some councils, part of the issue is,
is the good advice around mainly use planning?
Yeah. They have their own engineers
and obviously external engineers that support 'em to say,
don't build in these areas.
But the problem is, is if you've got a homeowner
who wants those C views, who's got deep pockets mm-hmm.
Who also has an another engineer that can
provide a different, it's not worth it for the council
to take them to the environment court,
basically stop the building there.
Do you think there are areas where, where us
as policy makers could strengthen the system in order
to prevent what is going to be more
and more often, um, areas which will be more state
or due to heavier range because of climate change?
I think, um, there are some certain ways, uh, sorry.
First of all, can I say that I think I'm really proud
of the way the team has worked with councils.
We started off by making formal submissions,
and now we've formed relationships,
and now councils come to us proactively.
So everything's better if you're doing it
through relationship base rather than a big stick.
Um, however, it is hard
for councils who are stuck in the middle.
They know we are the right place to build builders,
but they, they do get litigated.
And there's a deep pockets thing that happens.
And we saw that happen two decades ago in Christchurch.
Um, marshlands was once upon a time just marshlands
and then, you know, became houses,
and then it became a red zone.
So, um, there's a really stark example
that we have in our recent history.
What I think the councils appreciate about NHC is they can
say, but here's the scientific evidence to say
that you shouldn't build there.
And everybody looking at that can know, that will know
that an environment court will take that seriously.
I mean, if I could put something on my wishlist,
it would be something along the lines of a, a law change
that said, local councils must take account
of the NHC scientific evidence
that would probably help councils
that would actually, you know, help us.
And it might minimize some of that litigation.
I don't know, it would have to be studied, but just
If you've got a lot of other law changes
My one time this down.
The only thing I would say, the other thing I would say is
actually there's definitely a mind shift.
Um, so if you look at the last five to 10 years,
people are definitely, uh, more aware, um,
and more understanding of natural power risk.
And so one of your points is, um, are people, uh,
clear about who's responsible for what
and who's gonna pay for what.
So you can buy a house there or build a house there,
but just be really clear of the implications around that.
I think, you know, communication
and really understanding who, who's dealing with
what responsibility and who's paying last
One. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. Um, sorry, I'm, last question.
Uh, we are seeing more risk-based pricing from retail
insurance companies, um,
in some jurisdictions across the world.
They've gone to parametric pricing
because of the fact that, um,
basically they can't ensure for any other reasons.
Do you think they'll have any implications on NHC cover in
the future if they do change to a more pyramid sort
of pricing system?
Uh, look, you have, um, yeah.
The private sector has risk based pricing to your point.
And that's actually helpful in a, in a way
because it sends the message around where risk Yeah.
Greater information education.
No, no, that's right. And, uh,
even though it's bring to high.
So for us, we're a first loss scheme
and we're a community rate scheme.
So that's a, a design feature, um, of the act and,
and what we have as, um, as a country, uh,
this first loss, um, dynamic.
So, um, there's an interplay with, with the private sector,
um, the question is where, where's the boundary on it?
Um, and that could be around, um, you know, for us
as the cat and also we have land cover.
So look, we work well with the private sector.
They're complimentary, but they're quite different schemes.
Okay.
Oh, sorry. Should it be possible just to, again, to, um,
just to add to what Chris has said as well,
I think it affordability is such a life issue,
and it is a fair issue for everyone to be thinking about.
But if I, again, we have this benefit of the, you know,
our international conversations, insurance affordability,
and the financial settings are a downstream
symptom of the real problem.
The big problem, the core problem
is that the risk is increasing.
And so what the, uh, there's been a couple
of really good international research studies recently
that say the only, the really important place to start is
with data and information to understand the risk
and then look at ways to reduce the risk.
You actually, until you shrink the risk Yep.
If you, then you look at the financial settings
and the solutions and the things that you can do for
where you can't eliminate the risk at all.
Um, and so I think, yeah, as I said earlier, you know,
5 million people, we've probably got a chance
of joining up the dots
and being coordinated on that more
so than some other countries.
Plus we're starting from a really good foundation.
We've been living with disasters for 700 years as a country,
really, really nasty disasters.
And so we know how to that anyway.
Yeah. But I mean, ultimately I agree,
it's a financial stability risk if you don't deal
With it. Yes. Yeah.
We're in a good position, but we could be always
That's right.
I have a couple of subs in apartment. Yeah, please. Cool.
Thank you. Um, I'm interested in what's driving
that increase in risks that you're seeing across the world.
That's my first, um, supplementary.
And the second is you mentioned some helpful law changes
that could, um, you know, help with your work.
Has there been much engagement with the government in terms
of the, uh, upcoming, uh, climate adaptation, um, bill
that they're looking to, um, engage in? Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I think the thing that's driving, um,
the weather related events in New Zealand would be, uh,
changes in the weather patterns
and the amount of, um, just the tropical, uh, storms
that are coming down from the north.
And, you know, we're seeing it play
out in New Zealand, definitely.
And weather events, but also in increase in fires.
Um, and you see the same in Australia.
I mean, I think at one point over the summer,
Australia was on fire and under flood at the same time.
So the weather events are becoming more frequent,
more severe, and we are seeing that all over the world.
Um, so now New Zealand has a double whammy.
We've got our catastrophic risks of earthquake, volcano,
tsunami, the things we've always lived with.
And now we've got this new layer of, um,
climate related risks that we're all adjusting to as well,
uh, in terms of the climate adaptation that's being led
by the Ministry for the environment.
But we, uh, right there alongside them, uh, working
that they've got several pillars that they are delivering.
Pillar one is about data and information,
and that's the one that we are primarily helping
with at this stage, at this first stage, really ensuring
that there's that national view of the science and the risk.
Thank you. Um, can I move? Yeah, please.
Uh, it's kind of a quick primary.
Um, I'm interested in this line in your, um, report
that says the result for measure 4.31 homeowner satisfaction
for new e claims is 33%, well below our target of 60%.
The main driver of dissatisfaction is the perception
that settlement entitles under GI are sometimes
insufficient to complete replace.
But it's more than a perception thing, right?
Like you, you, it's not,
the payments aren't deliberately set up so
that the homeowners can complete the full repair
That's right. And set up
as a contribution Yeah. Payment. That's right.
So, uh, before 2023 when we had cycling
and Gabrielle land cover wasn't a broadly well understood
concept by New Zealanders.
Everyone thinks, oh yeah, we've got the scheme,
and if my house gets damaged in
earthquake, that's where I go.
But with, there is actually this additional cover
for the land just immediately around the house.
However, it is just a, a contribution payment.
And so people find that disappointing
because you get a contribution payment from NHC
and there is not really any other way
to ensure the rest of your garden.
Mm-hmm. Like, that's not something that's covered
by the private insurers.
So people do find it disappointing.
We also have learned a lot from cycling Gabrielle, about
how long it takes to do the assessment of a land claim.
And we've put a whole lot of changes in place since then
to make it faster and more efficient,
because people being disappointed
and having to wait is not an ideal situation,
and we don't want that to happen,
and we are not happy with that result,
and we're absolutely motivated to make it much, much better.
And so, you know, for a fact then that the, um, the driver
of dissatisfaction is people being unhappy
with how much they're receiving.
They re they put that in with the feedback that they give.
Yes. Yeah. Just,
Just a supplementary, uh, comment there.
Um, so on the North Island weather events, those, you know,
close to 12,000 claims, um, those 56 homeowners
probably had the most complex claims
because they're at the end of the tail.
Um, and the land, um, as a product is complicated
to communicate, and it's complicated
and expensive to administer.
So we should have a look at that at some stage.
But just just to shorten committee, we've only got, um,
12 claims left outstanding
for the North Island weather against,
which is very good at 12,000.
But just say, um, a s on the, on the land claim stuff,
especially during Gabrielle, um, is there, is there, um,
a difference between those who can claim under
multiple titles and those like Maori own land mm-hmm.
And, uh, those who have individual title?
Yeah. We have specific processes set up
for when there's collective ownership of a property, whether
that's, um, through, under a trust or through a trust
or, um, yeah, in a multitude of situations.
But access to this, I mean, it's a national scheme
for every New Zealander and,
and we want it to be accessible by every New Zealander.
So we have been doing some research, um, into access
to the scheme by Maori specifically, uh,
and that we did some work with Victoria University on that.
Those results came out to say there could be some, some ways
that the law could be made more accessible,
but at the moment there's a bit of a lack of
specific data on that.
So we've now commissioned a second wave of research
to go into quite a deep dive on those social,
any social barriers mm-hmm.
Because we want to find out
and then be able to provide advice on how that could be,
you know, made more workable.
You. Yep. Thank you. Uh,
Uh, Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you. Um, and apologies, I came in late,
so you may have covered this, but I wanna, um, look at some
of the outstanding issues around the Canterbury Earthquakes,
unsurprisingly mm-hmm.
Um, particularly the Onsold and reopened claims.
So 500 requests a month coming in for reopened claims
with a projection there could be a further 18,800
claims reopened.
What are most of those being reopened for? What is it?
Is it, um, foundation repairs?
Like what's the, what's the main driver
of reopening those claims? Mm-hmm.
The main, um, so the, just a slight bit of context first,
the, so the original 470,000 claims were settled
in 2016.
So the, none of these, uh, original, no,
that would be terrible if we were sitting
on a claim for 15 years.
But, so the original wave is settled,
and now what it is, is people come in to, to revisit
that claim for the property.
The most common catalyst is people going to sell the house
and doing an inspection
and finding damage they, they hadn't noticed before
or doing renovations
or, um, in other situations, there are certain companies
that proactively go street by street offering
to do free inspections.
How much of that is still happening?
The, the free inspections, a lot
Over 50%
of those incoming queries are from those companies,
But they're genuine, um, um, repairs that, that have
to be remediated, that they're finding
Sometimes it is earthquake damage, sometimes it's, uh,
I mean, our engineers are, are pretty skilled.
It's, I've seen so many now over the 15 years of its drains,
for example, they can tell when it's earthquake damage
pretty quickly or when it's just normal end
of life for a clay pipe.
So, I mean, obviously as we get further
and further out, onsold becomes more
and more of an issue in terms of the, the,
those properties have changed.
Ownerships, it's the original claim.
The ONSOLD program has been shut down.
Um, how much activity are you getting around the,
around Onsold properties?
So people who haven't been part
of the ONSELL program but are now buying
Yeah, exactly. New, new
queries around that,
because I think there's still quite a few people
who think there is assistance,
but of course it was shut down.
Yes. So when we, um, the,
the ONSELL program was launched in 2019.
20 20 20, yes. Probably already minister. Yeah.
Um, and, and it was intended to be a short, sharp kind
of relief program
because people had had been, you know,
buying a lemon basically.
Um, and so we've, 1600
people have gone through that program.
1100 people are now back in their, um, repaired houses
with their keys back.
And the last few are still just progressing
through the final bits of settlement and construction.
Um, alongside that same time in 2019
and 2020 that we did the onsell program,
there was an enormous amount of publicity through the radio.
Um, and also we sent out 44,000 letters to any property
that had been sold since the earthquakes to explain
that the onsold program was a circuit breaker to reset back
to encouraging people to do their due diligence
and, you know, the laws of Caveat M Door.
And so now what, when we regularly engage
with the Law Society and the Real Estate Institute to say,
you know, guys, when people are buying a house, we need to,
people need to be advising them on the risks
that they could be taking on and to go
and, you know, asking all the right questions.
And you as professionals should be making sure
that you're helping them with that.
So, I mean, one of the fears always was the, um, as is
where is sales mm-hmm.
And it being forgotten
through different chains of ownership.
Do we need to do more around post-disaster as is where
as sales and how it is that we protect
future owners down the chain?
That's a really good idea. And what could we do?
Yeah. Maybe there's any ideas?
No, maybe there's something we could have a look at. Yeah.
This is for future events, I think.
I think the thing, I mean, there is a, a tail stool
to be worked through for Canterbury.
Yeah. I think we are doing that in good faith.
You know, we are being fair and reasonable with that.
Um, you know, just 15 years.
We appreciate that, um, there is damage that was, you know,
unseen or not corrected, um, properly at the time.
Um, but we are helping you trying to help people move on,
but I think that's an interesting concept for us pick
Up. I mean, someone could be buying
a house today
that 12 years ago was sold as than as is.
Whereas some, some cracks have been plastered
over and they have no idea. That's right. That's right.
The, Yeah, I think one of the fundamental things is
that, um, you know, the, the model, um,
that was an operation at the time
of the Canterbury Earthquakes has now changed fundamentally.
So we now work with private insurance sector and,
and that's much better, uh, north Island
where the rents be a good case in point.
So I, I would hope we don't have a repeat of a lot
of those issues that, that we had. Then
I think only other thing to add, um, is that we
had under your stewardship, uh,
the public inquiry into the Earthquake Commission,
and one of the really strong recommendations, I think
that still has some room
to develop is the housing recovery component of that.
Because you, to your point, I think that has to be part of
that whole framing you put around how we support communities
to rebuild when they are in that post-disaster,
which is both how we sort of secure the,
the communities back, but also how you equip individuals
to know what to ask and to think about in the future.
Um, just looking at your, uh,
your ex revenue versus your expenses
and covering off the North Island weather events of three
or so years ago, cyclone Gabriel and,
and the Auckland floods, um, that was, that,
that saw a real spike in your claim expenses.
Obviously in 2223, the year
that we are looking at 24 25 was, has been described
as relatively benign.
Uh, and now we're in, uh, 25, 26.
What are you expecting as far as claims expenses, uh, given,
uh, the weather events
of the past month in some cases, tragic.
Mm-hmm. Um, what do you expect, how, how does
that compare 20,
or how, how do you think it will compare 25, 26 compared
to three years ago as far as claims expenses go?
Yeah, maybe I could just offer a comment on that.
Um, so if we look at the North Island weather events,
those two events combined, um, uh, 12,000 claims, uh,
at the moment it's cost about three 50 million.
It could be four or $500 million for that, those two events.
If we look at the current, uh, situation,
we've had a 300 claims, so we might get up to six or 700,
but that's probably a 50 $200 million event.
Mm. So that's what we,
Any other questions? Uh,
Dr. Russell?
Yeah. Um, a couple of sets of questions.
One is, um, just, you know, um,
natural hazards commission cover is driven by
fire insurance policies.
Mm-hmm. Um, do you know the extent to which
we are still covered as a country, what our
overall percentage of cover is?
We historically have said between 95 and 97. Yeah.
I think, um, if I'm not mistaken,
the affordability review may also,
that's just was announced last week, is also looking into
that because we only cover the first 300,000.
Yeah. We don't, um, have that view,
if you know what I mean, of the whole country.
What I can say is that our levy income hasn't reduced.
Right. So what, so we know
that the national portfolio is still well insured,
whether it's fully insured Yeah.
It's not something we'd have sight over. Yeah.
But we are still, yeah.
Okay. So there's a couple of ways with that.
One is whether individual homeowners
take out sufficient insurance.
The other is whether enough individual
homeowners are taking out insurance.
Yes. So, I'm prob I'm asking probably both those questions.
Yes. So you've answered that question.
Do you know about that question, the, whether there are,
whether everyone is taking out insurance?
You said 95 to 90.
So I guess if I, we know what the number
of houses are Yeah.
In New Zealand, and we, you know,
grow our portfolio every time a house is built.
Right. Um, so we, I mean, Chris, uh,
said folk can probably tell us,
but on that, for each one of those houses, we'd expect
to get a levied income.
And I guess what I'm saying is we are
not seeing a massive dip.
Right. And our levy income,
which would suggest everyone's still buying insurance, but
Just not buying enough at to Three I, yeah.
I just don't have visibility
of whether it's right up to the full sum insured.
Okay. So that affordability review
is gonna be really interesting in that. Yes.
Cool. Just a, um, going, I think there are,
there are three really important
components in the privacy sector.
One is access to insurance. Yep.
One is the affordability assurance,
and the other is actually adequacy of the insurance.
Yeah. Because you can have access to something
that's affordable, but it's not adequate.
Yeah. And so it's really important
that third dimension there're about, uh,
and to your, uh, other point, there are about 60,000, uh,
homes, uh, in New Zealand that are not insured.
Right? Yeah. Yeah.
So, so for us, we can look at what is insured,
but we're also interested in the ones that are not insured.
And there's a question, why are they not insured after the
Second? It's gonna be a really
interesting review. Yes. Right.
So Oh, oh, I did have, that was just in mind.
The other question of, we we're talking about modeling risks
and, um, and it's been a little bit of a, a, a,
a conversation this morning.
Um, so, you know, the thing is we've got known unknowns,
which is like the seismic risk.
Mm-hmm. We, um, we know
that the Ang fault is gonna go sometime.
Mm-hmm. We know what it'll cost,
but we don't exactly know when.
Mm-hmm. But, um, you know, we'll see what happens.
I better not be today. Um, um, but say there. Yeah.
What about the unknown? Unknown?
So climate feels to me like an unknown unknown in terms
of modeling the risks there?
Or have you been doing some work in that space?
We, um, our, our modeling focuses on our, our, our risks
that we cover, which are the catastrophic ones.
Landslide is the one that would be most impacted
by weather related events.
Um, we do, of course do the land cover, but ILT
and debris is, you know, it's relatively inexpensive
to, to manage those claims.
So landslides, um, we, we do invest in that, um,
in that science with Earth sciences
and we continue to model that.
We also start to look at compounding risks.
So if there's an earthquake that then causes landslides
as well, um, or an earthquake that then causes fire, um,
and then a tsunami, you know,
that these things have happened globally.
So pleasant. That's how I know
Nightmares.
Yes. Yeah. So yes, we do look at those things
and we do bait those into our
actuarial modeling as modeling as well.
Yep. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Dr. Wilson?
Yeah. Oh, thank you for that question, Dr. Russell.
Um, uh, I'm interested in exposure.
Um, so, uh, there is a narrative
and, uh, our friends from the greens repeat this, uh,
often that there is a consensus around the narrative
of climate change and how we having increased risk to folks
and bias and so on.
But it's not a consensus by any street.
There are other narratives.
And so the risk here is around a attribution bias
or subjective validation,
just attributing everything to climate change.
Whereas as you said earlier, over 700 years,
there's been many calamities and many natural hazards,
and the research has been done to sort of say
that over a millennia,
there is actually no increase in the amount of fires.
In fact, we've actually managed to mitigate against the, uh,
fires happening and mitigate against floods.
So that's an exposure for the government
that if we are attributing everything to climate change,
then we are attributing it to risk, and
therefore we are he our sensitivity
and we are height our insurance.
Um, just to caution, you don't need to answer to that,
but just saying that there is no consensus, uh, I flip now
to the other exposure, and this is the cipo.
Uh, really pleased to see
that you're looking at a different way
of approaching your investment, uh, approach.
Have you spoken to anyone about that?
Because we have other funds, which is a C and Yes.
Uh, you know, they've done a pretty good job, guardian.
So where are you at with moving from, you know,
government deposits?
Yes. S no, that's right. And maybe a few government bonds.
Yeah. Um, Michelle, I think one of the things that we
can be very pleased about over the last year
or two is just around our whole balance sheet management,
um, you know, and the investment portfolio in the spo,
which is a statement of, um, you know,
performance objectives.
Uh, for those that aren't aware of, of the new ture.
Um, yeah, we're gonna have a more balanced, uh, view, uh,
in terms of our investment portfolio,
have more diversification,
and we have been linking with, uh, others, um, you know,
as you say, a, c, C and, and, uh, um, others as well.
So yeah, the, the, the challenge is, um,
we haven't got much in the natural disaster fund.
That's the problem. Yeah. You know,
so we've got about six, 700 million.
Um, so we need to rebuild that and,
and have a diversified portfolio.
So, but we're taking all those, uh, uh,
into account. Good to hear. Thank
You. Right. Any further
questions, members? Okay.
Thank you. Thank you so
Much for coming. Thanks very much for
your time.
Don't in. Thanks.
Okay, members, let's have a, um, a we stop
for six minutes, um,
before B-N-C-B-C play on words, we stop.
Thank you.
Great for the.